# a-liner
This repository contains the `a-liner` script and sample data.

## Contents
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Sample Data](#sample-data)
- [Prepare input files](#prepare-input-files)
- [Citation](#citation)

## Requirements
This project has been tested with the following environment:
- `python 3.13.5`
- `matplotlib 3.10.3`
- `pandas 2.3.1`
- `numpy 2.3.2`
- `biopython 1.85`
- `bcbio-gff 0.7.1`
- `openpyxl 3.1.5`

## Installation
### Install via Bioconda (Recommended)
You can install a-liner directly from Bioconda:

```
conda install -c bioconda a-liner
```
> Note: If you haven't configured Bioconda before, follow the instructions [here](https://bioconda.github.io/) to set up the necessary channels.

### Optional: Create a dedicated conda environment
```
conda create -n a-liner-env a-liner
conda activate a-liner-env
conda install -c bioconda a-liner
```

### Install manually from source (alternative method)
If you prefer not to use Bioconda:
```
git clone https://github.com/mokuno3430/a-liner.git
cd a-liner
chmod u+x a-liner
```

Required dependencies:
```
conda install python=3.13.5 matplotlib=3.10.3 numpy pandas biopython bcbio-gff openpyxl 
```

## Usage


## Sample Data


## Prepare input files
### Sequence Configuration Files
### Alignment Input Files
a-liner supports alignment results generated by major alignment tools, including **BLASTN**, **minimap2**, **LASTZ**, and **MUMmer**.  
Below are minimal example commands to produce alignment outputs in formats compatible with a-liner.

#### BLASTN
Use the `-outfmt 6` option to generate tabular BLASTN output.
```
makeblastdb -in seq1.fa -dbtype nucl
blastn -query seq2.fa -db seq1.fa -outfmt 6 -out output_blastn.txt
```

#### minimap2
Use the `-c` option to generate PAF output that includes CIGAR strings in the `cg` tag.
```
minimap2 -c seq1.fa seq2.fa > output_minimap2.paf
```

#### LASTZ
Use `--format=general` to produce a general tabular format.

```
lastz seq1.fa[multiple] seq2.fa --format=general --output=output_lastz.txt
```

#### MUMmer
Run `show-coords` with `-H` to generate a headerless coordinate table.
```
nucmer --prefix output_nucmer seq1.fa seq2.fa
show-coords -H output_nucmer.delta > output_nucmer.mcoords
```

### Annotation Files
a-liner supports several annotation formats.
GFF3 is the recommended format, but genbank format is also available.

Supported formats:
- **GFF3 files:** Load standard GFF3 annotations using the `--gff3` option.
- **GFF3 with embedded FASTA:** GFF3 files that include an embedded FASTA section are also supported and can be loaded using the `--gff3` option.
- **Excel files converted from GFF:** Excel files created from a GFF file.  
  (e.g., by manually importing or editing the annotation table) can be loaded with the `--gff_xlsx` option.
- **GenBank flat files:** Load GenBank annotations using the --gb option.  
  (Color information in GenBank files is NOT currently supported.)

**Coloring features**  
If your annotation file includes an additional column appended to the right of the standard 9-column GFF format, and this column contains a valid color name (e.g., `red`, `#FF0000`), a-liner will use this color when drawing the corresponding gene feature.

This applies to both:  
- plain GFF files with an extra color column
- Excel files derived from such GFF files


### Highlight Regions File
To highlight specific regions, prepare a tab-delimited file and use either the `--highlight` or `--sp_highlight` option.  
The format is the same for both:

- **Column 1:** Sequence ID  
- **Column 2:** Start position (1-based)
- **Column 3:** End position (1-based)
- **Column 4:** Color specification (hex code, e.g., `#FF0000`, or a Matplotlib color name, e.g., `red`)

No header or index is required.  

**Example (highlights.txt):**

```
plasmid1    5000    15000    #FF9999
```

### Scatter Plot Data File

## Citation
Please cite the tool as follows until the formal publication becomes available:

> Okuno M. A-liner: linear alignment visualizer for genome comparisons.  
> Available at: https://github.com/mokuno3430/a-liner
